environments/medcalc_bench/README.md, before:

# MedCalc-Bench

### Overview
- **Environment ID**: `medcalc-bench`
- **Short description**: Evaluate clinical calculator reasoning and numeric/date outputs.
- **Tags**: medical, clinical, single-turn, numeric, date, evaluation

### Dataset
- **Primary dataset**: `ncbi/MedCalc-Bench-v1.2`
- Each example includes `Patient Note`, `Question`, `Calculator ID`, `Ground Truth`, `Lower Bound`, `Upper Bound`.
- Mapped fields in env: `question` (formatted prompt), `calc_id`, `ground_truth`, `lower_bound`, `upper_bound`.

    | Split | Count |
    | ----- | ----- |
    | train | 10543 |
    | test  | 1100  |

### Task
- **Type**: single-turn
- **Prompt**: `_build_prompt(patient_note, question)` instructs `<think>...</think>` and `<answer>...</answer>`.
- **Parser**: medarc_verifiers' `XMLParser` reads both `<think>` and `<answer>` tags.
- **Rubric**: `check_correctness` validates by calculator type:
  - IDs 13, 68: date equality (MM/DD/YYYY)
  - ID 69: tuple `(weeks, days)` equality
  - Integer IDs: integer equality (with rounding as needed)
  - Decimal IDs: numeric value within `[lower_bound, upper_bound]`

### Quickstart
Run an evaluation with default settings:

```bash
uv run vf-eval medcalc-bench
```

Configure model and sampling:

```bash
uv run vf-eval medcalc-bench \
    -m gpt-4.1-mini \
    -n 5 -r 3 -t 1024 -T 0.7 \
    -a '{"use_think": true}'
```

Notes:
- Use `-a` / `--env-args` to pass environment-specific configuration as a JSON object.
- The packaged `medarc_verifiers` XMLParser suppresses the upstream warning about `<think>` and still parses `<answer>` even if `<think>` is malformed.


### Environment Arguments

| Arg         | Type | Default | Description |
| ----------- | ---- | ------- | ----------- |
| `use_think` | bool | `False` | Whether to instruct `<think>...</think>` formatting |


### Metrics

| Metric | Meaning |
| ------ | ------- |
| `check_correctness` | (weight 1.0): validates numeric/date/tuple answers per calc ID |

### Adjustments

Adjusted the prompt to output the step-by-step thinking and final answer with the <think> and <answer> tags instead of responding with a JSON.

Commit message:

MedCalc-Bench tool updates (#89)
* MedCalc-Bench tool updates

* add calculator tool

* Don't repeat tool definitions in system prompt, add more restricted python allowed methods

* fix install

* update readme

---------

Co-authored-by: Benjamin Warner <me@benjaminwarner.dev>

environments/medcalc_bench/README.md, after:

# MedCalc-Bench

### Overview
- **Environment ID**: `medcalc-bench`
- **Short description**: Evaluate clinical calculator reasoning and numeric/date outputs.
- **Tags**: medical, clinical, single-turn, numeric, date, evaluation

### Dataset
- **Primary dataset**: `ncbi/MedCalc-Bench-v1.2`
- Each example includes `Patient Note`, `Question`, `Calculator ID`, `Ground Truth`, `Lower Bound`, `Upper Bound`.
- Mapped fields in env: `question` (formatted prompt), `calc_id`, `ground_truth`, `lower_bound`, `upper_bound`.

    | Split | Count |
    | ----- | ----- |
    | train | 10543 |
    | test  | 1100  |

### Task
- **Type**: single-turn, multi-turn with tool use
- **Prompt**: `_build_prompt(patient_note, question)` instructs `<think>...</think>` and `<answer>...</answer>`.
- **Parser**: medarc_verifiers' `XMLParser` reads both `<think>` and `<answer>` tags.
- **Rubric**: `check_correctness` validates by calculator type:
  - IDs 13, 68: date equality (MM/DD/YYYY)
  - ID 69: tuple `(weeks, days)` equality
  - Integer IDs: integer equality (with rounding as needed)
  - Decimal IDs: numeric value within `[lower_bound, upper_bound]`

### Quickstart
Run an evaluation with default settings:

```bash
uv run vf-eval medcalc-bench
```

Configure model and sampling:

```bash
uv run vf-eval medcalc-bench \
    -m gpt-4.1-mini \
    -n 5 -r 3 -t 1024 -T 0.7 \
    -a '{"one_shot": true, "add_python_tool": true}'
```

Notes:
- Use `-a` / `--env-args` to pass environment-specific configuration as a JSON object.
- Setting `use_think` to `True` works best with `one_shot` set to `True`, so that the LLM can learn exactly how it should format its answer.
- The packaged `medarc_verifiers` XMLParser suppresses the upstream warning about `<think>` and still parses `<answer>` even if `<think>` is malformed.
- **Tool safety**: The Python tool uses [`RestrictedPython`](https://restrictedpython.readthedocs.io/) for sandboxed execution with limited builtins (only `math`, `numpy`, `scipy` imports allowed). The calculator tool uses [`simpleeval`](https://github.com/danthedeckie/simpleeval) with only safe math operations.

### Environment Arguments

| Arg         | Type | Default | Description |
| ----------- | ---- | ------- | ----------- |
| `one_shot` | bool | `False` | Whether to use the one-shot prompt |
| `add_python_tool` | bool | `False` | Add the Python code execution tool (uses restricted Python with limited builtins) |
| `add_calculator_tool` | bool | `False` | Add the calculator tool (uses simple eval with safe math operations) |
| `max_turns` | int | `20` | Maximum number of turns in tool use environment |
| `answer_format` | str | `"xml"` | Answer format: `"xml"` (default) or `"boxed"` |
| `use_think` | bool | `False` | Whether to instruct `<think>...</think>` formatting |
| `system_prompt` | str | `None` | Custom system prompt (defaults to standard XML/BOXED prompt based on `answer_format`) |


### Metrics

| Metric | Meaning |
| ------ | ------- |
| `check_correctness` | (weight 1.0): validates numeric/date/tuple answers per calc ID |

### Adjustments

Adjusted the prompt to output the step-by-step thinking and final answer with the <think> and <answer> tags instead of responding with a JSON.


### References

```bibtex
@misc{khandekar2024medcalcbench,
      title={MedCalc-Bench: Evaluating Large Language Models for Medical Calculations}, 
      author={Nikhil Khandekar and Qiao Jin and Guangzhi Xiong and Soren Dunn and Serina S Applebaum and Zain Anwar and Maame Sarfo-Gyamfi and Conrad W Safranek and Abid A Anwar and Andrew Zhang and Aidan Gilson and Maxwell B Singer and Amisha Dave and Andrew Taylor and Aidong Zhang and Qingyu Chen and Zhiyong Lu},
      year={2024},
      eprint={2406.12036},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={id='cs.CL' full_name='Computation and Language' is_active=True alt_name='cmp-lg' in_archive='cs' is_general=False description='Covers natural language processing. Roughly includes material in ACM Subject Class I.2.7. Note that work on artificial languages (programming languages, logics, formal systems) that does not explicitly address natural-language issues broadly construed (natural-language processing, computational linguistics, speech, text retrieval, etc.) is not appropriate for this area.'}
}
```
